02_activities/assignments/DC_Cohort/Assignment2.md, before:

# Assignment 2: Design a Logical Model and Advanced SQL

🚨 **Please review our [Assignment Submission Guide](https://github.com/UofT-DSI/onboarding/blob/main/onboarding_documents/submissions.md)** 🚨 for detailed instructions on how to format, branch, and submit your work. Following these guidelines is crucial for your submissions to be evaluated correctly.

#### Submission Parameters:
* Submission Due Date: `November 12, 2025`
* Weight: 70% of total grade
* The branch name for your repo should be: `assignment-two`
* What to submit for this assignment:
    * This markdown (Assignment2.md) with written responses in Section 1 and 4
    * Two Entity-Relationship Diagrams (preferably in a pdf, jpeg, png format).
    * One .sql file 
* What the pull request link should look like for this assignment: `https://github.com/<your_github_username>/sql/pulls/<pr_id>`
    * Open a private window in your browser. Copy and paste the link to your pull request into the address bar. Make sure you can see your pull request properly. This helps the technical facilitator and learning support staff review your submission easily.

Checklist:
- [ ] Create a branch called `assignment-two`.
- [ ] Ensure that the repository is public.
- [ ] Review [the PR description guidelines](https://github.com/UofT-DSI/onboarding/blob/main/onboarding_documents/submissions.md#guidelines-for-pull-request-descriptions) and adhere to them.
- [ ] Verify that the link is accessible in a private browser window.

If you encounter any difficulties or have questions, please don't hesitate to reach out to our team via our Slack. Our Technical Facilitators and Learning Support staff are here to help you navigate any challenges.

***

## Section 1:
You can start this section following *session 1*, but you may want to wait until you feel comfortable wtih basic SQL query writing. 

Steps to complete this part of the assignment:
- Design a logical data model
- Duplicate the logical data model and add another table to it following the instructions
- Write, within this markdown file, an answer to Prompt 3


###  Design a Logical Model

#### Prompt 1
Design a logical model for a small bookstore. 📚

At the minimum it should have employee, order, sales, customer, and book entities (tables). Determine sensible column and table design based on what you know about these concepts. Keep it simple, but work out sensible relationships to keep tables reasonably sized. 

Additionally, include a date table. 

There are several tools online you can use, I'd recommend [Draw.io](https://www.drawio.com/) or [LucidChart](https://www.lucidchart.com/pages/).

**HINT:** You do not need to create any data for this prompt. This is a conceptual model only. 

#### Prompt 2
We want to create employee shifts, splitting up the day into morning and evening. Add this to the ERD.

#### Prompt 3
The store wants to keep customer addresses. Propose two architectures for the CUSTOMER_ADDRESS table, one that will retain changes, and another that will overwrite. Which is type 1, which is type 2? 

**HINT:** search type 1 vs type 2 slowly changing dimensions. 

```
Your answer...
```

***

## Section 2:
You can start this section following *session 4*.

Steps to complete this part of the assignment:
- Open the assignment2.sql file in DB Browser for SQLite:
	- from [Github](./02_activities/assignments/assignment2.sql)
	- or, from your local forked repository  
- Complete each question


### Write SQL

#### COALESCE
1. Our favourite manager wants a detailed long list of products, but is afraid of tables! We tell them, no problem! We can produce a list with all of the appropriate details. 

Using the following syntax you create our super cool and not at all needy manager a list:
```
SELECT 
product_name || ', ' || product_size|| ' (' || product_qty_type || ')'
FROM product
```

But wait! The product table has some bad data (a few NULL values). 
Find the NULLs and then using COALESCE, replace the NULL with a blank for the first column with nulls, and 'unit' for the second column with nulls. 

**HINT**: keep the syntax the same, but edited the correct components with the string. The `||` values concatenate the columns into strings. Edit the appropriate columns -- you're making two edits -- and the NULL rows will be fixed. All the other rows will remain the same.

<div align="center">-</div>

#### Windowed Functions
1. Write a query that selects from the customer_purchases table and numbers each customer’s visits to the farmer’s market (labeling each market date with a different number). Each customer’s first visit is labeled 1, second visit is labeled 2, etc. 

You can either display all rows in the customer_purchases table, with the counter changing on each new market date for each customer, or select only the unique market dates per customer (without purchase details) and number those visits. 

**HINT**: One of these approaches uses ROW_NUMBER() and one uses DENSE_RANK().

2. Reverse the numbering of the query from a part so each customer’s most recent visit is labeled 1, then write another query that uses this one as a subquery (or temp table) and filters the results to only the customer’s most recent visit.

3. Using a COUNT() window function, include a value along with each row of the customer_purchases table that indicates how many different times that customer has purchased that product_id.

<div align="center">-</div>

#### String manipulations
1. Some product names in the product table have descriptions like "Jar" or "Organic". These are separated from the product name with a hyphen. Create a column using SUBSTR (and a couple of other commands) that captures these, but is otherwise NULL. Remove any trailing or leading whitespaces. Don't just use a case statement for each product! 

| product_name               | description |
|----------------------------|-------------|
| Habanero Peppers - Organic | Organic     |

**HINT**: you might need to use INSTR(product_name,'-') to find the hyphens. INSTR will help split the column. 

2. Filter the query to show any product_size value that contain a number with REGEXP. 

<div align="center">-</div>

#### UNION
1. Using a UNION, write a query that displays the market dates with the highest and lowest total sales.

**HINT**: There are a possibly a few ways to do this query, but if you're struggling, try the following: 1) Create a CTE/Temp Table to find sales values grouped dates; 2) Create another CTE/Temp table with a rank windowed function on the previous query to create "best day" and "worst day"; 3) Query the second temp table twice, once for the best day, once for the worst day, with a UNION binding them. 

***

## Section 3:
You can start this section following *session 5*.

Steps to complete this part of the assignment:
- Open the assignment2.sql file in DB Browser for SQLite:
	- from [Github](./02_activities/assignments/assignment2.sql)
	- or, from your local forked repository  
- Complete each question

### Write SQL

#### Cross Join
1. Suppose every vendor in the `vendor_inventory` table had 5 of each of their products to sell to **every** customer on record. How much money would each vendor make per product? Show this by vendor_name and product name, rather than using the IDs.

**HINT**: Be sure you select only relevant columns and rows. Remember, CROSS JOIN will explode your table rows, so CROSS JOIN should likely be a subquery. Think a bit about the row counts: how many distinct vendors, product names are there (x)? How many customers are there (y). Before your final group by you should have the product of those two queries (x\*y). 

<div align="center">-</div>

#### INSERT
1. Create a new table "product_units". This table will contain only products where the `product_qty_type = 'unit'`. It should use all of the columns from the product table, as well as a new column for the `CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`.  Name the timestamp column `snapshot_timestamp`.

2. Using `INSERT`, add a new row to the product_unit table (with an updated timestamp). This can be any product you desire (e.g. add another record for Apple Pie). 

<div align="center">-</div>

#### DELETE 
1. Delete the older record for the whatever product you added.

**HINT**: If you don't specify a WHERE clause, [you are going to have a bad time](https://imgflip.com/i/8iq872).

<div align="center">-</div>

#### UPDATE
1. We want to add the current_quantity to the product_units table. First, add a new column, `current_quantity` to the table using the following syntax.
```
ALTER TABLE product_units
ADD current_quantity INT;
```

Then, using `UPDATE`, change the current_quantity equal to the **last** `quantity` value from the vendor_inventory details. 

**HINT**: This one is pretty hard. First, determine how to get the "last" quantity per product. Second, coalesce null values to 0 (if you don't have null values, figure out how to rearrange your query so you do.) Third, `SET current_quantity = (...your select statement...)`, remembering that WHERE can only accommodate one column. Finally, make sure you have a WHERE statement to update the right row, you'll need to use `product_units.product_id` to refer to the correct row within the product_units table. When you have all of these components, you can run the update statement.
*** 

## Section 4:
You can start this section anytime.

Steps to complete this part of the assignment:
- Read the article
- Write, within this markdown file, <1000 words.

### Ethics

Read: Boykis, V. (2019, October 16). _Neural nets are just people all the way down._ Normcore Tech. <br>
    https://vicki.substack.com/p/neural-nets-are-just-people-all-the

**What are the ethical issues important to this story?**

Consider, for example, concepts of labour, bias, LLM proliferation, moderating content, intersection of technology and society, ect. 


```
Your thoughts...
```

Commit message:

this is my submission of assignment 2, with permission from Thomas, this assignment is being submitted at the revised due date

02_activities/assignments/DC_Cohort/Assignment2.md, after:

# Assignment 2: Design a Logical Model and Advanced SQL

🚨 **Please review our [Assignment Submission Guide](https://github.com/UofT-DSI/onboarding/blob/main/onboarding_documents/submissions.md)** 🚨 for detailed instructions on how to format, branch, and submit your work. Following these guidelines is crucial for your submissions to be evaluated correctly.

#### Submission Parameters:
* Submission Due Date: `November 12, 2025`
* Weight: 70% of total grade
* The branch name for your repo should be: `assignment-two`
* What to submit for this assignment:
    * This markdown (Assignment2.md) with written responses in Section 1 and 4
    * Two Entity-Relationship Diagrams (preferably in a pdf, jpeg, png format).
    * One .sql file 
* What the pull request link should look like for this assignment: `https://github.com/<your_github_username>/sql/pulls/<pr_id>`
    * Open a private window in your browser. Copy and paste the link to your pull request into the address bar. Make sure you can see your pull request properly. This helps the technical facilitator and learning support staff review your submission easily.

Checklist:
- [ ] Create a branch called `assignment-two`.
- [ ] Ensure that the repository is public.
- [ ] Review [the PR description guidelines](https://github.com/UofT-DSI/onboarding/blob/main/onboarding_documents/submissions.md#guidelines-for-pull-request-descriptions) and adhere to them.
- [ ] Verify that the link is accessible in a private browser window.

If you encounter any difficulties or have questions, please don't hesitate to reach out to our team via our Slack. Our Technical Facilitators and Learning Support staff are here to help you navigate any challenges.

***

## Section 1:
You can start this section following *session 1*, but you may want to wait until you feel comfortable wtih basic SQL query writing. 

Steps to complete this part of the assignment:
- Design a logical data model
- Duplicate the logical data model and add another table to it following the instructions
- Write, within this markdown file, an answer to Prompt 3


###  Design a Logical Model

#### Prompt 1
Design a logical model for a small bookstore. 📚

At the minimum it should have employee, order, sales, customer, and book entities (tables). Determine sensible column and table design based on what you know about these concepts. Keep it simple, but work out sensible relationships to keep tables reasonably sized. 

Additionally, include a date table. 

There are several tools online you can use, I'd recommend [Draw.io](https://www.drawio.com/) or [LucidChart](https://www.lucidchart.com/pages/).

**HINT:** You do not need to create any data for this prompt. This is a conceptual model only. 

#### Prompt 2
We want to create employee shifts, splitting up the day into morning and evening. Add this to the ERD.

#### Prompt 3
The store wants to keep customer addresses. Propose two architectures for the CUSTOMER_ADDRESS table, one that will retain changes, and another that will overwrite. Which is type 1, which is type 2? 

**HINT:** search type 1 vs type 2 slowly changing dimensions. 

```
After googling what these two type 1 and type 2 mean (not related to diabetes), type 1 is essentially overwriting existing data and type 2 is tracking history. I imagin that to keep addresses we use type 2, in that in the table there are multiple entries by the same customer but with different addresses and at different points in time (presumably the customer moved). In the type 1 case, the architecture of the table would enable each customer to only have one customer_id label and address! 
```

***

## Section 2:
You can start this section following *session 4*.

Steps to complete this part of the assignment:
- Open the assignment2.sql file in DB Browser for SQLite:
	- from [Github](./02_activities/assignments/assignment2.sql)
	- or, from your local forked repository  
- Complete each question


### Write SQL

#### COALESCE
1. Our favourite manager wants a detailed long list of products, but is afraid of tables! We tell them, no problem! We can produce a list with all of the appropriate details. 

Using the following syntax you create our super cool and not at all needy manager a list:
```
SELECT 
product_name || ', ' || product_size|| ' (' || product_qty_type || ')'
FROM product
```

But wait! The product table has some bad data (a few NULL values). 
Find the NULLs and then using COALESCE, replace the NULL with a blank for the first column with nulls, and 'unit' for the second column with nulls. 

**HINT**: keep the syntax the same, but edited the correct components with the string. The `||` values concatenate the columns into strings. Edit the appropriate columns -- you're making two edits -- and the NULL rows will be fixed. All the other rows will remain the same.

<div align="center">-</div>

#### Windowed Functions
1. Write a query that selects from the customer_purchases table and numbers each customer’s visits to the farmer’s market (labeling each market date with a different number). Each customer’s first visit is labeled 1, second visit is labeled 2, etc. 

You can either display all rows in the customer_purchases table, with the counter changing on each new market date for each customer, or select only the unique market dates per customer (without purchase details) and number those visits. 

**HINT**: One of these approaches uses ROW_NUMBER() and one uses DENSE_RANK().

2. Reverse the numbering of the query from a part so each customer’s most recent visit is labeled 1, then write another query that uses this one as a subquery (or temp table) and filters the results to only the customer’s most recent visit.

3. Using a COUNT() window function, include a value along with each row of the customer_purchases table that indicates how many different times that customer has purchased that product_id.

<div align="center">-</div>

#### String manipulations
1. Some product names in the product table have descriptions like "Jar" or "Organic". These are separated from the product name with a hyphen. Create a column using SUBSTR (and a couple of other commands) that captures these, but is otherwise NULL. Remove any trailing or leading whitespaces. Don't just use a case statement for each product! 

| product_name               | description |
|----------------------------|-------------|
| Habanero Peppers - Organic | Organic     |

**HINT**: you might need to use INSTR(product_name,'-') to find the hyphens. INSTR will help split the column. 

2. Filter the query to show any product_size value that contain a number with REGEXP. 

<div align="center">-</div>

#### UNION
1. Using a UNION, write a query that displays the market dates with the highest and lowest total sales.

**HINT**: There are a possibly a few ways to do this query, but if you're struggling, try the following: 1) Create a CTE/Temp Table to find sales values grouped dates; 2) Create another CTE/Temp table with a rank windowed function on the previous query to create "best day" and "worst day"; 3) Query the second temp table twice, once for the best day, once for the worst day, with a UNION binding them. 

***

## Section 3:
You can start this section following *session 5*.

Steps to complete this part of the assignment:
- Open the assignment2.sql file in DB Browser for SQLite:
	- from [Github](./02_activities/assignments/assignment2.sql)
	- or, from your local forked repository  
- Complete each question

### Write SQL

#### Cross Join
1. Suppose every vendor in the `vendor_inventory` table had 5 of each of their products to sell to **every** customer on record. How much money would each vendor make per product? Show this by vendor_name and product name, rather than using the IDs.

**HINT**: Be sure you select only relevant columns and rows. Remember, CROSS JOIN will explode your table rows, so CROSS JOIN should likely be a subquery. Think a bit about the row counts: how many distinct vendors, product names are there (x)? How many customers are there (y). Before your final group by you should have the product of those two queries (x\*y). 

<div align="center">-</div>

#### INSERT
1. Create a new table "product_units". This table will contain only products where the `product_qty_type = 'unit'`. It should use all of the columns from the product table, as well as a new column for the `CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`.  Name the timestamp column `snapshot_timestamp`.

2. Using `INSERT`, add a new row to the product_unit table (with an updated timestamp). This can be any product you desire (e.g. add another record for Apple Pie). 

<div align="center">-</div>

#### DELETE 
1. Delete the older record for the whatever product you added.

**HINT**: If you don't specify a WHERE clause, [you are going to have a bad time](https://imgflip.com/i/8iq872).

<div align="center">-</div>

#### UPDATE
1. We want to add the current_quantity to the product_units table. First, add a new column, `current_quantity` to the table using the following syntax.
```
ALTER TABLE product_units
ADD current_quantity INT;
```

Then, using `UPDATE`, change the current_quantity equal to the **last** `quantity` value from the vendor_inventory details. 

**HINT**: This one is pretty hard. First, determine how to get the "last" quantity per product. Second, coalesce null values to 0 (if you don't have null values, figure out how to rearrange your query so you do.) Third, `SET current_quantity = (...your select statement...)`, remembering that WHERE can only accommodate one column. Finally, make sure you have a WHERE statement to update the right row, you'll need to use `product_units.product_id` to refer to the correct row within the product_units table. When you have all of these components, you can run the update statement.
*** 

## Section 4:
You can start this section anytime.

Steps to complete this part of the assignment:
- Read the article
- Write, within this markdown file, <1000 words.

### Ethics

Read: Boykis, V. (2019, October 16). _Neural nets are just people all the way down._ Normcore Tech. <br>
    https://vicki.substack.com/p/neural-nets-are-just-people-all-the

**What are the ethical issues important to this story?**

Consider, for example, concepts of labour, bias, LLM proliferation, moderating content, intersection of technology and society, ect. 


```
Prior to reading this article, I always roughly had an idea of what ImageNet was and the famous researcher from China that is Dr. Fei-Fei Li. However, I did not recognize the extent to which this involved thousands of hours of tagging and intensive-cheap labour work. I think there are 3 main ethical considerations to contemplate. 

The first ethical consideration is consent and copyright. Currently, a large section of my doctoral research touches on GenAI in the contexts of music. One issue behind this is that while we can train neural networks and optical computer recognition (OCR) technology to optimize machine visioning so that can read sheet music, the issue remaining is that quite often these models do not have licenses or a legal consent to use such images as part of their training data. What if the images that were tagged were obtained through illegal means or not consented? Furthermore, do we really know where these images came from? While you could argue that all of these images were "free-for-all" given that they exist on the internet, scientists and researchers have to abide by more stringent regulations in this regard. One is not necessarily building a dataset for oneself, but for research and commercialization. I work for a company known as Swift Medical, where we have the largest wounds database in the world. However, a large majority of our datasets required patient consent and willingness to be imaged and have data collected in order to fine tune neural networks/machine visioning platforms for detecting and tracking dermatological conditions. 

The second ethical consideration is in the conception of labour. As a former research assistant myself, I can sympathize with the $10/hour labelling work that Dr. Li's research assistant's had to go through. Such mundane work is something that I have suffered through before. However, I am not necessarily a proponent of outsourcing work to Amazon Turk in particular. I would much rather Prolific. This is because, as the article has stated, the workmanship in Amazon Turk can be considerably lower. Furthermore, since the economic incentive of Turk is much lower, the demand for a so-called "high quality" finish is less. The lack of adequate payment is something that could really skew the dataset. 

Finally, a crucial ethical consideration lies in the notion of content moderation. In many ways, images--just like art, music, and other fine art forms--can be subjective. One person may label the image one way, while another may label it differently. Human labellers inevitably carry inherent biases that can be harmful, especially if those biases are inputted into their labelling practices. For example, the concept of "weak" and "nerdy" in a person with glasses is a harmful narrative that becomes only perpetuated if such a case is part of the dataset (dependant on weighting, tuning parameters etc.). In what ways can LLMs and models perpetuate harmful narratives because it was fed a specific flavour of data (which was initially subjective)? Furthermore, is anyone really moderating this asides from the occasional pushback? 
```
